>> Anjana Vakil: So as I mentioned,
the most important concept here that
we're gonna be talking about the whole
day or the whole lifetime that
we do functional programming is
the notion of a pure function.
So in some of the course materials here,
you'll notice these little slides link,
that will bring
you to the presentation slides that
I'm gonna be walking through as we go.
And then we'll jump back to the exercises
after we go through each section.
We are here because we have heard
that it is a thing, [LAUGH] but
we wanna understand better what it is.
And there's a lot of different ways
that I can answer this question.
What is functional programming?
For one thing,
it's certainly a trend, in a sense,
it's become a lot more en vogue,
if you will,
90s reference to [LAUGH] web development,
in particular.
And in the last maybe decade or
two, it has become a lot more
present in kind of the practical
day to day world of software
development outside of the web,
as well as on the web.
But it is not a flash in
the pan kind of trend.
It is something that has been around since
before digital computers even existed.
It existed as a mathematical
construct way back in the 30s when
Alonzo Church developed
the lambda calculus,
which I am happy to dig into after
the course, or if folks have questions.
But this is something that
has been important to
theoretical computer science for
100 years.
So it's not going anywhere, don't worry,
but the buzzwords are real.
There is a lot of jargon
in functional land.
And you'll hear words that sound
like they should make sense,
like higher order, but what does that
mean, or referential transparency.
And you'll hear words that you may have
never encountered before, like monoid or
functor, or maybe you did record some of
those in your very advanced math classes.
But we're not gonna be focusing
too much on this jargon,
because what is the jargon
important about?
What is this lambda symbol anyway,
this thing that's in every logo of
functional programming languages?
What does this all mean?
So today, although at some point you will
wanna go and Wikipedia these various
terms, we're not gonna be focused on
the jargon so much as the concepts.
Because that is what we want
to be taking away as not,
I know a bunch of fancy words
that I can use to sound smart.
But I know a bunch of concepts that
I can use to write code that doesn't
break on me.
[LAUGH] So that's the goal here.
We can also define functional
programming as a coding style.
Some people describe it as
a functional style of programming.
And that style of programming is
supported in certain languages and
not supported in others.
Now I'm not just talking about style in
terms of syntax or naming conventions or
what have you, but really a way of
kind of thinking about the program,
which we will dig into
throughout this course.
But in terms of the languages that support
it, there are a whole bunch of languages
out there that are what
are typically considered functional
languages like Haskell, or Clojure,
or the Elm language family, OCaml.
There are also some that
are specifically developed for the web,
like Elm or Elixir, which is based
on Erlang, things like that.
But we don't need any of those other
bajillion languages cuz we have a great
functional programming language right
in front of us in our browser, and
that's JavaScript.
Now, was it designed to be a purely
functional language like some of
these other languages?
Not really,
has it acquired some less functional
characteristics over the years, perhaps.
But we can still do totally valid
functional programming in JavaScript,
because all we need is a function.
So that's what we're
gonna be digging into.
But as I mentioned, if you would like to
continue your journey after this course,
there are some other cool languages and
toolkits and
things like that that you can explore.
Today, we are in functional
JavaScript land exclusively.
So I mentioned before that this
is more than just a code style in
the sense of syntax or linting.
This is a way of thinking
about our programs.
So another word for
that is a programming paradigm.
A paradigm, in general,
is some kind of worldview or
kind of meta-level understanding
of what this entire world, or
in our programming use case, what the
entire world of the program is made up of.
What are the things inside of a program?
How do they interact with each other?
And there are a whole bunch of different
ways of thinking about computer programs
that are called different
programming paradigms.
So you might have heard
of certain paradigms,
like functional programming is one.
It's often contrasted with
object-oriented programming,
which perhaps is more familiar to
a lot of folks, especially if anyone
is coming out of languages like Python or
Java or that sort of thing.
And we can do both object-oriented and
functional programming in JavaScript,
arguably.
But let us take a moment to step back and
consider,
what is a paradigm, and
how do these paradigms compare?
So, a lot of the time,
we're used to writing code in
JavaScript in an imperative paradigm.
So imperative programming is sort of
a higher class of paradigm that includes
object-oriented programming.
It's sort of a special case
of imperative programming.
In imperative programming,
the program is made up of commands.
I tell the computer, do this, do that,
assign this variable value of this,
assign this function the value of that,
call this function on this variable, etc.
So I'm giving a list of
instructions to the computer, and
the computer is executing
what I told it to do.
So I am telling the computer how
it should execute step by step.
That's in contrast to another
kind of higher level or
meta programming paradigm that we
referred to as declarative programming,
which functional programming
is a special case of.
So in declarative programming,
unlike in imperative programming
where the work that I do as a developer
is to give the computer commands and
tell it how I want the program to run.
In declarative programming, I just tell
the computer kind of the output or
the result that I would like, and I let
it figure out how it's gonna get to that.
So has anybody encountered a declarative
programming language before?
Spoiler alert, you totally have,
things like HTML.
It's declarative, it doesn't say, hey,
here's how you should cascade all of my
style sheets or what have you, or here's
how you should load all of my links.
It just says, this is the page
I wanna see, browser, please,
[LAUGH] give it to me.
Or what about SQL?
Any backend folks around?
SQL is another example.
SQL is a database querying
language that is also a classic
example of a declarative
language where we don't tell
the computer how to execute a lookup or
a select or a join.
We just tell it what we
would like to have, and
we let the underlying implementation
figure out the details.
Now this is all to say that when we're
doing functional programming, we're less
concerned with thinking about the program
as step by step, do this, then do that.
We are more concerned with
thinking about the program as
a single transformation
of input into output.
So we're gonna spend a lot more
time talking about how that works?
What it feels like,
what tools we need to do it, etc.
So functional programming, as I mentioned,
is sort of a subset of
declarative programming.
And in object-oriented programming,
we are focused on essentially taking
our state, meaning information or
values that changes over time
throughout the course of
the program, and
wrapping it up in little objects.
And then having those objects do things
like call methods on each other so
that they can send and
receive information.
In functional programming,
we're gonna be wrapping everything
up in the unit of a function.
That is really the only thing that we
need to do functional programming is one
construct, a pure function.
So that is what we're gonna
spend the entire course
digging into the intricacies about.
So, I wanna give a shout out to a,
it's a bit old now,
but an article that kind of
inspired this whole course called
an introduction to functional
programming by Mary Rose Cook.
It came on publication
from the Recurse Center,
which is an amazing programming
community in New York and
virtual that I was a part of, in about,
or I continue to be a part of.
But I attended this programming retreat,
they call it, in about 2015.
And worked with Mary Rose Cook,
who happened to be an excellent
teacher of the basic principles
of functional programming without
getting caught up in all of the jargon.
Now this article, which you can read
through the links, it's Python-based, but
the principles are essentially the same.
So I just wanna give a huge
shout out to Mary Rose Cook and
the entire Recurse Center crew,
who essentially taught me functional
programming in the world of JavaScript
using the principles that we're
gonna go through in this course.
So, there's some fun further
reading links at the end.